Making the V in VQA Matter:
Elevating the Role of Image Understanding in Visual Question Answering
Yash Goyal∗1 Tejas Khot∗1 Douglas Summers-Stay2 Dhruv Batra3 Devi Parikh3
1
Virginia Tech 2 Army Research Laboratory 3 Georgia Institute of Technology

arXiv:1612.00837v3 [cs.CV] 15 May 2017

1

{ygoyal, tjskhot}@vt.edu

2

douglas.a.summers-stay.civ@mail.mil

Abstract

3

Who is wearing glasses?
man

Problems at the intersection of vision and language
are of significant importance both as challenging research
questions and for the rich set of applications they enable.
However, inherent structure in our world and bias in our
language tend to be a simpler signal for learning than visual modalities, resulting in models that ignore visual information, leading to an inflated sense of their capability.
We propose to counter these language priors for the task
of Visual Question Answering (VQA) and make vision (the V
in VQA) matter! Specifically, we balance the popular VQA
dataset [3] by collecting complementary images such that
every question in our balanced dataset is associated with
not just a single image, but rather a pair of similar images
that result in two different answers to the question. Our
dataset is by construction more balanced than the original VQA dataset and has approximately twice the number
of image-question pairs. Our complete balanced dataset
is publicly available at http://visualqa.org/ as
part of the 2nd iteration of the Visual Question Answering
Dataset and Challenge (VQA v2.0).
We further benchmark a number of state-of-art VQA
models on our balanced dataset. All models perform significantly worse on our balanced dataset, suggesting that
these models have indeed learned to exploit language priors. This finding provides the first concrete empirical evidence for what seems to be a qualitative sense among practitioners.
Finally, our data collection protocol for identifying complementary images enables us to develop a novel interpretable model, which in addition to providing an answer
to the given (image, question) pair, also provides a counterexample based explanation. Specifically, it identifies an image that is similar to the original image, but it believes has
a different answer to the same question. This can help in
building trust for machines among their users.

woman

Is the umbrella upside down?
yes

no

{dbatra, parikh}@gatech.edu

Where is the child sitting?
fridge

arms

How many children are in the bed?
2

1

Figure 1: Examples from our balanced VQA dataset.

1. Introduction
Language and vision problems such as image captioning [8, 4, 7, 19, 40, 21, 28] and visual question answering
(VQA) [3, 26, 27, 10, 31] have gained popularity in recent
years as the computer vision research community is progressing beyond “bucketed” recognition and towards solving multi-modal problems.
The complex compositional structure of language makes
problems at the intersection of vision and language challenging. But recent works [6, 47, 49, 16, 18, 1] have pointed
out that language also provides a strong prior that can result in good superficial performance, without the underlying
models truly understanding the visual content.
This phenomenon has been observed in image captioning [6] as well as visual question answering [47, 49, 16, 18,
1]. For instance, in the VQA [3] dataset, the most common sport answer “tennis” is the correct answer for 41%
of the questions starting with “What sport is”, and “2” is
the correct answer for 39% of the questions starting with
“How many”. Moreover, Zhang et al. [47] points out a particular ‘visual priming bias’ in the VQA dataset – specifically, subjects saw an image while asking questions about it.
Thus, people only ask the question “Is there a clock tower
in the picture?” on images actually containing clock towers. As one particularly perverse example – for questions

∗ The first two authors contributed equally.

1

in the VQA dataset starting with the n-gram “Do you see
a . . . ”, blindly answering “yes” without reading the rest of
the question or looking at the associated image results in a
VQA accuracy of 87%!
These language priors can give a false impression that
machines are making progress towards the goal of understanding images correctly when they are only exploiting
language priors to achieve high accuracy. This can hinder
progress in pushing state of art in the computer vision aspects of multi-modal AI [39, 47].
In this work, we propose to counter these language biases and elevate the role of image understanding in VQA.
In order to accomplish this goal, we collect a balanced VQA
dataset with significantly reduced language biases. Specifically, we create a balanced VQA dataset in the following
way – given an (image, question, answer) triplet (I, Q, A)
from the VQA dataset, we ask a human subject to identify
an image I 0 that is similar to I but results in the answer to
the question Q to become A0 (which is different from A).
Examples from our balanced dataset are shown in Fig. 1.
More random examples can be seen in Fig. 2 and on the
project website1 .
Our hypothesis is that this balanced dataset will force
VQA models to focus on visual information. After all,
when a question Q has two different answers (A and A0 )
for two different images (I and I 0 respectively), the only
way to know the right answer is by looking at the image.
Language-only models have simply no basis for differentiating between the two cases – (Q, I) and (Q, I 0 ), and
by construction must get one wrong. We believe that this
construction will also prevent language+vision models from
achieving high accuracy by exploiting language priors, enabling VQA evaluation protocols to more accurately reflect
progress in image understanding.
Our balanced VQA dataset is also particularly difficult
because the picked complementary image I 0 is close to the
original image I in the semantic (fc7) space of VGGNet
[37] features. Therefore, VQA models will need to understand the subtle differences between the two images to predict the answers to both the images correctly.
Note that simply ensuring that the answer distribution
P (A) is uniform across the dataset would not accomplish
the goal of alleviating language biases discussed above.
This is because language models exploit the correlation
between question n-grams and the answers, e.g. questions
starting with “Is there a clock” has the answer “yes” 98%
of the time, and questions starting with “Is the man standing” has the answer “no” 69% of the time. What we need
is not just higher entropy in P (A) across the dataset, but
higher entropy in P (A|Q) so that image I must play a role
in determining A. This motivates our balancing on a perquestion level.

Our complete balanced dataset contains approximately
1.1 Million (image, question) pairs – almost double the size
of the VQA [3] dataset – with approximately 13 Million
associated answers on the ∼200k images from COCO [23].
We believe this balanced VQA dataset is a better dataset to
benchmark VQA approaches, and is publicly available for
download on the project website.
Finally, our data collection protocol enables us to develop a counter-example based explanation modality. We
propose a novel model that not only answers questions
about images, but also ‘explains’ its answer to an imagequestion pair by providing “hard negatives” i.e., examples
of images that it believes are similar to the image at hand,
but it believes have different answers to the question. Such
an explanation modality will allow users of the VQA model
to establish greater trust in the model and identify its oncoming failures.
Our main contributions are as follows: (1) We balance
the existing VQA dataset [3] by collecting complementary
images such that almost every question in our balanced
dataset is associated with not just a single image, but rather
a pair of similar images that result in two different answers
to the question. The result is a more balanced VQA dataset,
which is also approximately twice the size of the original
VQA dataset. (2) We evaluate state-of-art VQA models
(with publicly available code) on our balanced dataset, and
show that models trained on the existing ‘unbalanced’ VQA
dataset perform poorly on our new balanced dataset. This
finding confirms our hypothesis that these models have been
exploiting language priors in the existing VQA dataset to
achieve higher accuracy. (3) Finally, our data collection
protocol for identifying complementary scenes enables us
to develop a novel interpretable model, which in addition to
answering questions about images, also provides a counterexample based explanation – it retrieves images that it believes are similar to the original image but have different answers to the question. Such explanations can help in building trust for machines among their users.

2. Related Work
Visual Question Answering. A number of recent
works have proposed visual question answering datasets
[3, 22, 26, 31, 10, 46, 38, 36] and models [9, 25, 2, 43, 24,
27, 47, 45, 44, 41, 35, 20, 29, 15, 42, 33, 17]. Our work
builds on top of the VQA dataset from Antol et al. [3],
which is one of the most widely used VQA datasets. We
reduce the language biases present in this popular dataset,
resulting in a dataset that is more balanced and about twice
the size of the VQA dataset. We benchmark one ‘baseline’
VQA model [24], one attention-based VQA model [25], and
the winning model from the VQA Real Open Ended Challenge 2016 [9] on our balanced VQA dataset, and compare
them to a language-only model.

1 http://visualqa.org/

2

Figure 2: Random examples from our proposed balanced VQA dataset. Each question has two similar images with different
answers to the question.
Data Balancing and Augmentation. At a high level,
our work may be viewed as constructing a more rigorous
evaluation protocol by collecting ‘hard negatives’. In that
spirit, it is similar to the work of Hodosh et al. [14], who
created a binary forced-choice image captioning task, where

a machine must choose to caption an image with one of two
similar captions. To compare, Hodosh et al. [14] implemented hand-designed rules to create two similar captions
for images, while we create a novel annotation interface to
collect two similar images for questions in VQA.

3

is similar to I, but results in the answer to the question Q
to become A0 (which is different from A). We built an annotation interface (shown in Fig. 3) to collect such complementary images on Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT).
AMT workers are shown 24 nearest-neighbor images of I,
the question Q, and the answer A, and asked to pick an image I 0 from the list of 24 images for which Q “makes sense”
and the answer to Q is not A.
To capture “question makes sense”, we explained to the
workers (and conducted qualification tests to make sure that
they understood) that any premise assumed in the question
must hold true for the image they select. For instance,
the question “What is the woman doing?” assumes that a
woman is present and can be seen in the image. It does
not make sense to ask this question on an image without a
woman visible in it.
We compute the 24 nearest neighbors by first representing each image with the activations from the penultimate (‘fc7’) layer of a deep Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) – in particular VGGNet [37] – and then using `2 distances to compute neighbors.
After the complementary images are collected, we conduct a second round of data annotation to collect answers on
these new images. Specifically, we show the picked image
I 0 with the question Q to 10 new AMT workers, and collect
10 ground truth answers (similar to [3]). The most common
answer among the 10 is the new answer A0 .
This two-stage data collection process finally results in
pairs of complementary images I and I 0 that are semantically similar, but have different answers A and A0 respectively to the same question Q. Since I and I 0 are semantically similar, a VQA model will have to understand the
subtle differences between I and I 0 to provide the right answer to both images. Example complementary images are
shown in Fig. 1, Fig. 2, and on the project website.
Note that sometimes it may not be possible to pick one
of the 24 neighbors as a complementary image. This is because either (1) the question does not make sense for any
of the 24 images (e.g. the question is ‘what is the woman
doing?’ and none of the neighboring images contain a
woman), or (2) the question is applicable to some neighboring images, but the answer to the question is still A (same
as the original image I). In such cases, our data collection
interface allowed AMT workers to select “not possible”.
We analyzed the data annotated with “not possible” selection by AMT workers and found that this typically happens when (1) the object being talked about in the question
is too small in the original image and thus the nearest neighbor images, while globally similar, do not necessarily contain the object resulting in the question not making sense,
or (2) when the concept in the question is rare (e.g., when
workers are asked to pick an image such that the answer to
the question “What color is the banana?” is NOT “yellow”).

Figure 3: A snapshot of our Amazon Mechanical Turk
(AMT) interface to collect complementary images.

Perhaps the most relevant to our work is that of Zhang et
al. [47], who study this goal of balancing VQA in a fairly
restricted setting – binary (yes/no) questions on abstract
scenes made from clipart (part of the VQA abstract scenes
dataset [3]). Using clipart allows Zhang et al. to ask human annotators to “change the clipart scene such that the
answer to the question changes”. Unfortunately, such finegrained editing of image content is simply not possible in
real images. The novelty of our work over Zhang et al.
is the proposed complementary image data collection interface, application to real images, extension to all questions
(not just binary ones), benchmarking of state-of-art VQA
models on the balanced dataset, and finally the novel VQA
model with counter-example based explanations.
Models with explanation. A number of recent works
have proposed mechanisms for generating ‘explanations’
[13, 34, 48, 11, 32] for the predictions made by deep
learning models, which are typically ‘black-box’ and noninterpretable. [13] generates a natural language explanation
(sentence) for image categories. [34, 48, 11, 32] provide
‘visual explanations’ or spatial maps overlaid on images to
highlight the regions that the model focused on while making its predictions. In this work, we introduce a third explanation modality: counter-examples, instances the the model
believes are close to but not belonging to the category predicted by the model.

3. Dataset
We build on top of the VQA dataset introduced by Antol et al. [3]. VQA real images dataset contains just over
204K images from COCO [23], 614K free-form natural language questions (3 questions per image), and over 6 million
free-form (but concise) answers (10 answers per question).
While this dataset has spurred significant progress in VQA
domain, as discussed earlier, it has strong language biases.
Our key idea to counter this language bias is the following – for every (image, question, answer) triplet (I, Q, A)
in the VQA dataset, our goal is to identify an image I 0 that
4

Answers from unbalanced dataset

Answers from balanced dataset

Figure 4: Distribution of answers per question type for a random sample of 60K questions from the original (unbalanced)
VQA dataset [3] (top) and from our proposed balanced dataset (bottom).
In total, such “not possible” selections make up 22% of
all the questions in the VQA dataset. We believe that a
more sophisticated interface that allowed workers to scroll
through many more than 24 neighboring images could possibly reduce this fraction. But, (1) it will likely still not be
0 (there may be no image in COCO where the answer to “is
the woman flying?” is NOT “no”), and (2) the task would
be significantly more cumbersome for workers, making the
data collection significantly more expensive.

ditional means to detect anomalous trends on the test data.
Hence, our complete balanced dataset contains more than
443K train, 214K val and 453K test (question, image) pairs.
Following original VQA dataset [3], we divide our test set
into 4 splits: test-dev, test-standard, test-challenge and testreserve. For more details, please refer to [3]. Our complete
balanced dataset is publicly available for download.
We use the publicly released VQA evaluation script in
our experiments. The evaluation metric uses 10 groundtruth answers for each question to compute VQA accuracies. As described above, we collected 10 answers for every complementary image and its corresponding question
to be consistent with the VQA dataset [3]. Note that while
unlikely, it is possible that the majority vote of the 10 new
answers may not match the intended answer of the person
picking the image either due to inter-human disagreement,
or if the worker selecting the complementary image simply

We collected complementary images and the corresponding new answers for all of train, val and test splits of
the VQA dataset. AMT workers picked “not possible” for
approximately 135K total questions. In total, we collected
approximately 195K complementary images for train, 93K
complementary images for val, and 191K complementary
images for test set. In addition, we augment the test set
with ∼18K additional (question, image) pairs to provide ad5

made a mistake. We find this to be the case – i.e., A to be
the same as A0 – for about 9% of our questions.
Fig. 4 compares the distribution of answers per questiontype in our new balanced VQA dataset with the original (unbalanced) VQA dataset [3]. We notice several interesting
trends. First, binary questions (e.g. “is the”, “is this”, “is
there”, “are”, “does”) have a significantly more balanced
distribution over “yes” and “no” answers in our balanced
dataset compared to unbalanced VQA dataset. “baseball”
is now slightly more popular than “tennis” under “what
sport”, and more importantly, overall “baseball” and “tennis” dominate less in the answer distribution. Several other
sports like “frisbee”, “skiing”, “soccer”, “skateboarding”,
“snowboard” and “surfing” are more visible in the answer
distribution in the balanced dataset, suggesting that it contains heavier tails. Similar trends can be seen across the
board with colors, animals, numbers, etc. Quantitatively,
we find that the entropy of answer distributions averaged
across various question types (weighted by frequency of
question types) increases by 56% after balancing, confirming the heavier tails in the answer distribution.
As the statistics show, while our balanced dataset is not
perfectly balanced, it is significantly more balanced than the
original VQA dataset. The resultant impact of this balancing on performance of state-of-the-art VQA models is discussed in the next section.

Multimodal Compact Bilinear Pooling (MCB) [9]:
This is the winning entry on the real images track of the
VQA Challenge 2016. This model uses a multimodal compact bilinear pooling mechanism to attend over image features and combine the attended image features with language features. These combined features are then passed
through a fully-connected layer to predict a probability distribution over the 3000 most frequent answers. It should be
noted that MCB uses image features from a more powerful CNN architecture ResNet [12] while the previous two
models use image features from VGGNet [37].
Baselines: To put the accuracies of these models in perspective, we compare to the following baselines: Prior:
Predicting the most common answer in the training set, for
all test questions. The most common answer is “yes” in
both the unbalanced and balanced sets. Language-only:
This language-only baseline has a similar architecture as
Deeper LSTM Question + norm Image [24] except that it
only accepts the question as input and does not utilize any
visual information. Comparing VQA models to languageonly ablations quantifies to what extent VQA models have
succeeded in leveraging the image to answer the questions.
The results are shown in Table 1. For fair comparison of
accuracies with original (unbalanced) dataset, we create a
balanced train set which is of similar size as original dataset
(referred to as Bhalf in table). For benchmarking, we also
report results using the full balanced train set.

4. Benchmarking Existing VQA Models
Our first approach to training a VQA model that emphasizes the visual information over language-priors-alone is
to re-train the existing state-of-art VQA models (with code
publicly available [24, 25, 9]) on our new balanced VQA
dataset. Our hypothesis is that simply training a model to
answer questions correctly on our balanced dataset will already encourage the model to focus more on the visual signal, since the language signal alone has been impoverished.
We experiment with the following models:
Deeper LSTM Question + norm Image (d-LSTM+nI) [24]: This was the VQA model introduced in [3] together
with the dataset. It uses a CNN embedding of the image, a
Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) embedding of the question, combines these two embeddings via a point-wise multiplication, followed by a multi-layer perceptron classifier
to predict a probability distribution over 1000 most frequent
answers in the training dataset.
Hierarchical Co-attention (HieCoAtt) [25]: This is a
recent attention-based VQA model that ‘co-attends’ to both
the image and the question to predict an answer. Specifically, it models the question (and consequently the image
via the co-attention mechanism) in a hierarchical fashion:
at the word-level, phrase-level and entire question-level.
These levels are combined recursively to produce a distribution over the 1000 most frequent answers.

Approach

UU

UB

Bhalf B

BB

Prior
Language-only
d-LSTM+n-I [24]
HieCoAtt [25]
MCB [9]

27.38
48.21
54.40
57.09
60.36

24.04
41.40
47.56
50.31
54.22

24.04
41.47
49.23
51.88
56.08

24.04
43.01
51.62
54.57
59.14

Table 1: Performance of VQA models when trained/tested
on unbalanced/balanced VQA datasets. UB stands for
training on Unbalanced train and testing on Balanced val
datasets. UU, Bhalf B and BB are defined analogously.
We see that the current state-of-art VQA models trained
on the original (unbalanced) VQA dataset perform significantly worse when evaluated on our balanced dataset, compared to evaluating on the original unbalanced VQA dataset
(i.e., comparing UU to UB in the table). This finding confirms our hypothesis that existing models have learned severe language biases present in the dataset, resulting in a reduced ability to answer questions correctly when the same
question has different answers on different images. When
these models are trained on our balanced dataset, their performance improves (compare UB to Bhalf B in the table).
Further, when models are trained on complete balanced
6

dataset (∼twice the size of original dataset), the accuracy
improves by 2-3% (compare Bhalf B to BB). This increase
in accuracy suggests that current VQA models are data
starved, and would benefit from even larger VQA datasets.
As the absolute numbers in the table suggest, there is
significant room for improvement in building visual understanding models that can extract detailed information from
images and leverage this information to answer free-form
natural language questions about images accurately. As expected from the construction of this balanced dataset, the
question-only approach performs significantly worse on the
balanced dataset compared to the unbalanced dataset, again
confirming the language-bias in the original VQA dataset,
and its successful alleviation (though not elimination) in our
proposed balanced dataset.
Note that in addition to the lack of language bias, visual
reasoning is also challenging on the balanced dataset since
there are pairs of images very similar to each other in image representations learned by CNNs, but with different answers to the same question. To be successful, VQA models
need to understand the subtle differences in these images.
The paired construction of our dataset allows us to analyze the performance of VQA models in unique ways.
Given the prediction of a VQA model, we can count the
number of questions where both complementary images
(I,I 0 ) received correct answer predictions for the corresponding question Q, or both received identical (correct
or incorrect) answer predictions, or both received different
answer predictions. For the HieCoAtt [25] model, when
trained on the unbalanced dataset, 13.5% of the pairs were
answered correctly, 59.9% of the pairs had identical predictions, and 40.1% of the pairs had different predictions.
In comparison, when trained on balanced dataset, the same
model answered 17.7% of the pairs correctly, a 4.2% increase in performance! Moreover, it predicts identical answers for 10.5% fewer pairs (49.4%). This shows that by
training on balanced dataset, this VQA model has learned
to tell the difference between two otherwise similar images.
However, significant room for improvement remains. The
VQA model still can not tell the difference between two images that have a noticeable difference – a difference enough
to result in the two images having different ground truth answers for the same question asked by humans.
To benchmark models on VQA v2.0 dataset, we also
train these models on VQA v2.0 train+val and report results on VQA v2.0 test-standard in Table 2. Papers reporting results on VQA v2.0 dataset are suggested to report teststandard accuracies and compare their methods’ accuracies
with accuracies reported in Table 2.
Analysis of Accuracies for Different Answer Types:
We further analyze the accuracy breakdown over answer
types for Multimodal Compact Bilinear Pooling (MCB) [9]
and Hierarchical Co-attention (HieCoAtt) [25] models.

Approach

All

Yes/No

Number

Other

Prior
Language-only
d-LSTM+n-I [24]
MCB [9]

25.98
44.26
54.22
62.27

61.20
67.01
73.46
78.82

00.36
31.55
35.18
38.28

01.17
27.37
41.83
53.36

Table 2: Performance of VQA models when trained on
VQA v2.0 train+val and tested on VQA v2.0 test-standard
dataset.
Approach

Ans Type

UU

UB

Bhalf B

BB

MCB [9]

Yes/No
Number
Other
All

81.20
34.80
51.19
60.36

70.40
31.61
47.90
54.22

74.89
34.69
47.43
56.08

77.37
36.66
51.23
59.14

HieCoAtt [25]

Yes/No
Number
Other
All

79.99
34.83
45.55
57.09

67.62
32.12
41.96
50.31

70.93
34.07
42.11
51.88

71.80
36.53
46.25
54.57

Table 3: Accuracy breakdown over answer types achieved
by MCB [9] and HieCoAtt [25] models when trained/tested
on unbalanced/balanced VQA datasets. UB stands for
training on Unbalanced train and testing on Balanced val
datasets. UU, Bhalf B and BB are defined analogously.

The results are shown in Table 3. First, we immediately notice that the accuracy for the answer-type “yes/no”
drops significantly from UU to UB (∼10.8% for MCB and
∼12.4% for HieCoAtt). This suggests that these VQA models are really exploiting language biases for “yes/no” type
questions, which leads to high accuracy on unbalanced val
set because the unbalanced val set also contains these biases. But performance drops significantly when tested on
the balanced val set which has significantly reduced biases.
Second, we note that for both the state-of-art VQA models, the largest source of improvement from UB to Bhalf B
is the “yes/no” answer-type (∼4.5% for MCB and ∼3% for
HieCoAtt) and the “number” answer-type (∼3% for MCB
and ∼2% for HieCoAtt).
This trend is particularly interesting since the “yes/no”
and “number” answer-types are the ones where existing approaches have shown minimal improvements. For instance,
in the results announced at the VQA Real Open Ended
Challenge 20162 , the accuracy gap between the top-4 approaches is a mere 0.15% in “yes/no” answer-type category (and a gap of 3.48% among the top-10 approaches).
Similarly, “number” answer-type accuracies only vary by
2 http://visualqa.org/challenge.html

7

1.51% and 2.64% respectively. The primary differences between current generation of state-of-art approaches seem to
come from the “other” answer-type where accuracies vary
by 7.03% and 10.58% among the top-4 and top-10 entries.
This finding suggests that language priors present in the
unbalanced VQA dataset (particularly in the “yes/no” and
“number” answer-type questions) lead to similar accuracies
for all state-of-art VQA models, rendering vastly different
models virtually indistinguishable from each other (in terms
of their accuracies for these answer-types). Benchmarking
these different VQA models on our balanced dataset (with
reduced language priors) may finally allow us to distinguish
between ‘good’ models (ones that encode the ‘right’ inductive biases for this task, such as attention-based or compositional models) from others that are simply high-capacity
models tuning themselves to the biases in the dataset.

tennis”, this “hard negative mining” strategy might pick an
image without a woman in it, which would make for a confusing and non-meaningful explanation to show to a user,
if the goal is to convince them that the model has understood the question. One could add a component of question
relevance [30] to identify better counter-examples.
Instead, we take advantage of our balanced data collection mechanism to directly train for identifying a good
counter-example. Note that the I 0 picked by humans is a
good counter-example, by definition. Q is relevant to I 0
(since workers were asked to ensure it was), I 0 has a different answer A0 than A (the original answer), and I 0 is similar
to I. Thus, we have supervised training data where I 0 is a
counter-example from IN N (K = 24) for question Q and
answer A. We train a model that learns to provide negative
or counter-example explanations from this supervised data.
To summarize, during test time, our model does two
things: first it answers the question (similar to a conventional VQA model), and second, it explains its answer via
a counter-example. For the first step, it is given as input an
image I and a question Q, and it outputs a predicted answer Apred . For the second (explaining) step, it is given as
input the question Q, an answer to be explained A4 , and a
set IN N from which the model has to identify the counterexample. At training time, the model is given image I,
the question Q, and the corresponding ground-truth answer
A to learn to answer questions. It is also given Q, A, I 0
(human-picked), IN N (I 0 ∈ IN N ) to learn to explain.
Our model architecture contains two heads on top of a
shared base ‘trunk’ – one head for answering the question
and the other head for providing an explanation. Specifically, our model consists of three major components:

5. Counter-example Explanations
We propose a new explanation modality: counterexamples. We propose a model that when asked a question
about an image, not only provides an answer, but also provides example images that are similar to the input image but
the model believes have different answers to the input question. This would instill trust in the user that the model does
in fact ‘understand’ the concept being asked about. For instance, for a question “What color is the fire-hydrant?” a
VQA model may be perceived as more trustworthy if in addition to saying “red”, it also adds “unlike this” and shows
an example image containing a fire-hydrant that is not red.3

5.1. Model
Concretely, at test time, our “negative explanation”
or “counter-example explanation” model functions in two
steps. In the first step, similar to a conventional VQA
model, it takes in an (image, question) pair (Q, I) as input
and predicts an answer Apred . In the second step, it uses
this predicted answer Apred along with the question Q to
retrieve an image that is similar to I but has a different answer than Apred to the question Q. To ensure similarity, the
model picks one of K nearest neighbor images of I, IN N =
{I1 , I2 , ..., IK } as the counter-example.
How may we find these “negative explanations”? One
way of picking the counter-example from IN N is to follow the classical “hard negative mining” strategy popular in
computer vision. Specifically, simply pick the image that
has the lowest P (Apred |Q, Ii ) where i ∈ 1, 2, ..., K. We
compare to this strong baseline. While this ensures that
P (Apred |Q, Ii ) is low for Ii , it does not ensure that the Q
“makes sense” for Ii . Thus, when trying to find a negative
explanation for “Q: What is the woman doing? A: Playing

1. Shared base: The first component of our model is
learning representations of images and questions. It is a
2-channel network that takes in an image CNN embedding
as input in one branch, question LSTM embedding as input in another branch, and combines the two embeddings
by a point-wise multiplication. This gives us a joint QI
embedding, similar to the model in [24]. The second and
third components – the answering model and the explaining
model – take in this joint QI embedding as input, and therefore can be considered as two heads over this first shared
component. A total of 25 images – the original image I and
24 candidate images {I1 , I2 , ..., I24 } are passed through this
shared component of the network.
2. Answering head: The second component is learning
to answer questions. Similar to [24], it consists of a fullyconnected layer fed into a softmax that predicts the prob4 In practice, this answer to be explained would be the answer predicted
by the first step Apred . However, we only have access to negative explanation annotations from humans for the ground-truth answer A to the
question. Providing A to the explanation module also helps in evaluating
the two steps of answering and explaining separately.

3 It could easily also convey what color it thinks the fire-hydrant is in
the counter-example. We will explore this in future work.

8

ability distribution over answers given the QI embedding.
Only the QI embedding corresponding to the original image I is passed through this component and result in a crossentropy loss.
3. Explaining head: The third component is learning to
explain an answer A via a counter-example image. It is a
2-channel network which linearly transforms the joint QI
embedding (output from the first component) and the answer to be explained A (provided as input)5 into a common
embedding space. It computes an inner product of these 2
embeddings resulting in a scalar number for each image in
IN N (also provided as input, from which a counter-example
is to be picked). These K inner-product values for K candidate images are then passed through a fully connected layer
to generate K scores S(Ii ), where i ∈ {1, 2, ..., K}. The K
candidate images {I1 , I2 , ..., IK } are then sorted according
to these scores S(Ii ) as being most to least likely of being
good counter-examples or negative explanations. This component is trained with pairwise hinge ranking losses that encourage S(I 0 ) − S(Ii ) > M − , Ii ∈ {I1 , I2 , ..., IK } \
{I 0 }, i.e. the score of the human picked image I 0 is encouraged to be higher than all other candidate images by a desired margin of M (a hyperparameter) and a slack of . This
is of course the classical ‘constraint form’ of the pairwise
hinge ranking
the standard expres loss, and we minimize

0
sion max 0, M − S(I ) − S(Ii ) . The combined loss
function for the shared component is
L = − log P (A|I, Q)

X

+λ
max 0, M − S(I 0 ) − S(Ii )

Figure 5: Three counter-example or negative explanations
(right three columns) generated by our model, along with
the input image (left), the input question Q and the predicted answer A.
VQA head in our model, and top three negative explanations produced by the explanation head. We see that most
of these explanations are sensible and reasonable – the images are similar to I but with answers that are different from
those predicted for I.
For quantitative evaluation, we compare our model with
a number of baselines: Random: Sorting the candidate images in IN N randomly. That is, a random image from IN N
is picked as the most likely counter-example. Distance:
Sorting the candidate images in increasing order of their
distance from the original image I. That is, the image from
IN N most similar to I is picked as the most likely counterexample. VQA Model: Using a VQA model’s probability
for the predicted answer to sort the candidate images in ascending order of P (A|Q, Ii ). That is, the image from IN N
least likely to have A as the answer to Q is picked as the
most likely counter-example.
Note that while I 0 – the image picked by humans – is
a good counter-example, it is not necessarily the unique
(or even the “best”) counter-example. Humans were simply asked to pick any image where Q makes sense and the
answer is not A. There was no natural criteria to convey to
humans to pick the “best” one – it is not clear what “best”
would mean in the first place. To provide robustness to this
potential ambiguity in the counter-example chosen by humans, in a manner similar to the ImageNet [5] top-5 evaluation metric, we evaluate our approach using the Recall@5
metric. It measures how often the human picked I 0 is among
the top-5 in the sorted list of Ii s in IN N our model produces.

(1)

i

where, the first term is the cross-entropy loss (for training the answering module) on (I, Q), the second term is the
sum of pairwise hinge losses that encourage the explaining
model to give high score to image I 0 (picked by humans)
than other Ii s in IN N , and λ is the trade-off weight parameter between the two losses.

5.2. Results
Fig. 5 shows qualitative examples of negative explanations produced by our model. We see the original image
I, the question asked Q, the answer Apred predicted by the

Recall@5

5 Note that in theory, one could provide A
pred as input during training
instead of A. After all, this matches the expected use case scenario at test
time. However, this alternate setup (where Apred is provided as input instead of A) leads to a peculiar and unnatural explanation training goal –
specifically, the explanation head will still be learning to explain A since
that is the answer for which we collected negative explanation human annotations. It is simply unnatural to build that model that answers a question
with Apred but learn to explain a different answer A! Note that this is an
interesting scenario where the current push towards “end-to-end” training
for everything breaks down.

Random

Distance

VQA [3]

Ours

20.79

42.84

21.65

43.39

Table 4: Negative or counter-example explanation performance of our model compared to strong baselines.
In Table 4, we can see that our explanation model significantly outperforms the random baseline, as well as the VQA
[3] model. Interestingly, the strongest baseline is Distance.
While our approach outperforms it, it is clear that identify9

References

ing an image that is a counter-example to I from among I’s
nearest neighbors is a challenging task. Again, this suggests
that visual understanding models that can extract meaningful details from images still remain elusive.

[1] A. Agrawal, D. Batra, and D. Parikh. Analyzing the Behavior
of Visual Question Answering Models. In EMNLP, 2016. 1
[2] J. Andreas, M. Rohrbach, T. Darrell, and D. Klein. Deep
compositional question answering with neural module networks. In CVPR, 2016. 2
[3] S. Antol, A. Agrawal, J. Lu, M. Mitchell, D. Batra, C. L.
Zitnick, and D. Parikh. VQA: Visual Question Answering.
In ICCV, 2015. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10
[4] X. Chen and C. L. Zitnick. Mind’s Eye: A Recurrent Visual Representation for Image Caption Generation. In CVPR,
2015. 1
[5] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei.
ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database. In
CVPR, 2009. 9
[6] J. Devlin, S. Gupta, R. B. Girshick, M. Mitchell, and C. L.
Zitnick. Exploring nearest neighbor approaches for image
captioning. CoRR, abs/1505.04467, 2015. 1
[7] J. Donahue, L. A. Hendricks, S. Guadarrama, M. Rohrbach,
S. Venugopalan, K. Saenko, and T. Darrell. Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Networks for Visual Recognition and
Description. In CVPR, 2015. 1
[8] H. Fang, S. Gupta, F. N. Iandola, R. Srivastava, L. Deng,
P. Dollár, J. Gao, X. He, M. Mitchell, J. C. Platt, C. L. Zitnick, and G. Zweig. From Captions to Visual Concepts and
Back. In CVPR, 2015. 1
[9] A. Fukui, D. H. Park, D. Yang, A. Rohrbach, T. Darrell, and
M. Rohrbach. Multimodal Compact Bilinear Pooling for Visual Question Answering and Visual Grounding. In EMNLP,
2016. 2, 6, 7
[10] H. Gao, J. Mao, J. Zhou, Z. Huang, and A. Yuille. Are you
talking to a machine? dataset and methods for multilingual
image question answering. In NIPS, 2015. 1, 2
[11] Y. Goyal, A. Mohapatra, D. Parikh, and D. Batra. Towards
Transparent AI Systems: Interpreting Visual Question Answering Models. In ICML Workshop on Visualization for
Deep Learning, 2016. 4
[12] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning
for image recognition. In CVPR, 2016. 6
[13] L. A. Hendricks, Z. Akata, M. Rohrbach, J. Donahue,
B. Schiele, and T. Darrell. Generating visual explanations.
In ECCV, 2016. 4
[14] M. Hodosh and J. Hockenmaier. Focused evaluation for image description with binary forced-choice tasks. In Workshop
on Vision and Language, Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2016. 3
[15] I. Ilievski, S. Yan, and J. Feng. A focused dynamic
attention model for visual question answering. CoRR,
abs/1604.01485, 2016. 2
[16] A. Jabri, A. Joulin, and L. van der Maaten. Revisiting Visual
Question Answering Baselines. In ECCV, 2016. 1
[17] K. Kafle and C. Kanan. Answer-type prediction for visual
question answering. In CVPR, 2016. 2
[18] K. Kafle and C. Kanan. Visual Question Answering:
Datasets, Algorithms, and Future Challenges.
CoRR,
abs/1610.01465, 2016. 1

6. Conclusion
To summarize, in this paper we address the strong language priors for the task of Visual Question Answering and
elevate the role of image understanding required to be successful on this task. We develop a novel data-collection interface to ‘balance’ the popular VQA dataset [3] by collecting ‘complementary’ images. For every question in the
dataset, we have two complementary images that look similar, but have different answers to the question.
This effort results in a dataset that is not only more balanced than the original VQA dataset by construction, but
also is about twice the size. We find both qualitatively
and quantitatively that the ‘tails’ of the answer distribution are heavier in this balanced dataset, which reduces
the strong language priors that may be exploited by models. Our complete balanced dataset is publicly available at
http://visualqa.org/ as part of the 2nd iteration
of the Visual Question Answering Dataset and Challenge
(VQA v2.0).
We benchmark a number of (near) state-of-art VQA
models on our balanced dataset and find that testing them
on this balanced dataset results in a significant drop in performance, confirming our hypothesis that these models had
indeed exploited language biases.
Finally, our framework around complementary images
enables us to develop a novel explainable model – when
asked a question about an image, our model not only returns
an answer, but also produces a list of similar images that it
considers ‘counter-examples’, i.e. where the answer is not
the same as the predicted response. Producing such explanations may enable a user to build a better mental model
of what the system considers a response to mean, and ultimately build trust.
Acknowledgements. We thank Anitha Kannan and Aishwarya
Agrawal for helpful discussions. This work was funded in part
by NSF CAREER awards to DP and DB, an ONR YIP award to
DP, ONR Grant N00014-14-1-0679 to DB, a Sloan Fellowship to
DP, ARO YIP awards to DB and DP, an Allen Distinguished Investigator award to DP from the Paul G. Allen Family Foundation, ICTAS Junior Faculty awards to DB and DP, Google Faculty Research Awards to DP and DB, Amazon Academic Research
Awards to DP and DB, AWS in Education Research grant to DB,
and NVIDIA GPU donations to DB. The views and conclusions
contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. Government, or any
sponsor.

10

[37] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman. Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition. In ICLR, 2015.
2, 4, 6
[38] M. Tapaswi, Y. Zhu, R. Stiefelhagen, A. Torralba, R. Urtasun, and S. Fidler. MovieQA: Understanding Stories in
Movies through Question-Answering. In CVPR, 2016. 2
[39] A. Torralba and A. Efros. Unbiased look at dataset bias. In
CVPR, 2011. 2
[40] O. Vinyals, A. Toshev, S. Bengio, and D. Erhan. Show and
Tell: A Neural Image Caption Generator. In CVPR, 2015. 1
[41] P. Wang, Q. Wu, C. Shen, A. van den Hengel, and A. R. Dick.
Explicit knowledge-based reasoning for visual question answering. CoRR, abs/1511.02570, 2015. 2
[42] Q. Wu, P. Wang, C. Shen, A. van den Hengel, and A. R.
Dick. Ask me anything: Free-form visual question answering based on knowledge from external sources. In CVPR,
2016. 2
[43] C. Xiong, S. Merity, and R. Socher. Dynamic memory networks for visual and textual question answering. In ICML,
2016. 2
[44] H. Xu and K. Saenko. Ask, Attend and Answer: Exploring Question-Guided Spatial Attention for Visual Question
Answering. In ECCV, 2016. 2
[45] Z. Yang, X. He, J. Gao, L. Deng, and A. Smola. Stacked Attention Networks for Image Question Answering. In CVPR,
2016. 2
[46] L. Yu, E. Park, A. C. Berg, and T. L. Berg. Visual Madlibs:
Fill-in-the-blank Description Generation and Question Answering. In ICCV, 2015. 2
[47] P. Zhang, Y. Goyal, D. Summers-Stay, D. Batra, and
D. Parikh. Yin and Yang: Balancing and Answering Binary
Visual Questions. In CVPR, 2016. 1, 2, 4
[48] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba.
Learning Deep Features for Discriminative Localization. In
CVPR, 2015. 4
[49] B. Zhou, Y. Tian, S. Sukhbaatar, A. Szlam, and R. Fergus.
Simple Baseline for Visual Question Answering. CoRR,
abs/1512.02167, 2015. 1

[19] A. Karpathy and L. Fei-Fei. Deep Visual-Semantic Alignments for Generating Image Descriptions. In CVPR, 2015.
1
[20] J.-H. Kim, S.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kwak, M.-O. Heo, J. Kim, J.W. Ha, and B.-T. Zhang. Multimodal Residual Learning for
Visual QA. In NIPS, 2016. 2
[21] R. Kiros, R. Salakhutdinov, and R. S. Zemel. Unifying
Visual-Semantic Embeddings with Multimodal Neural Language Models. TACL, 2015. 1
[22] R. Krishna, Y. Zhu, O. Groth, J. Johnson, K. Hata, J. Kravitz,
S. Chen, Y. Kalantidis, L.-J. Li, D. A. Shamma, et al.
Visual genome: Connecting language and vision using
crowdsourced dense image annotations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.07332, 2016. 2
[23] T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan, P. Dollár, and C. L. Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. In ECCV, 2014. 2, 4
[24] J. Lu, X. Lin, D. Batra, and D. Parikh.
Deeper
LSTM and normalized CNN Visual Question Answering
model. https://github.com/VT-vision-lab/
VQA_LSTM_CNN, 2015. 2, 6, 7, 8
[25] J. Lu, J. Yang, D. Batra, and D. Parikh. Hierarchical
Question-Image Co-Attention for Visual Question Answering. In NIPS, 2016. 2, 6, 7
[26] M. Malinowski and M. Fritz. A Multi-World Approach to
Question Answering about Real-World Scenes based on Uncertain Input. In NIPS, 2014. 1, 2
[27] M. Malinowski, M. Rohrbach, and M. Fritz. Ask your neurons: A neural-based approach to answering questions about
images. In ICCV, 2015. 1, 2
[28] J. Mao, W. Xu, Y. Yang, J. Wang, and A. L. Yuille. Explain Images with Multimodal Recurrent Neural Networks.
In NIPS, 2014. 1
[29] H. Noh and B. Han. Training recurrent answering units
with joint loss minimization for vqa. CoRR, abs/1606.03647,
2016. 2
[30] A. Ray, G. Christie, M. Bansal, D. Batra, and D. Parikh.
Question Relevance in VQA: Identifying Non-Visual And
False-Premise Questions. In EMNLP, 2016. 8
[31] M. Ren, R. Kiros, and R. Zemel. Exploring models and data
for image question answering. In NIPS, 2015. 1, 2
[32] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin. ”Why Should I
Trust You?”: Explaining the Predictions of Any Classifier.
In Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), 2016. 4
[33] K. Saito, A. Shin, Y. Ushiku, and T. Harada. Dualnet:
Domain-invariant network for visual question answering.
CoRR, abs/1606.06108, 2016. 2
[34] R. R. Selvaraju, A. Das, R. Vedantam, M. Cogswell,
D. Parikh, and D. Batra. Grad-CAM: Why did you say that?
Visual Explanations from Deep Networks via Gradientbased Localization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02391, 2016.
4
[35] K. J. Shih, S. Singh, and D. Hoiem. Where to look: Focus
regions for visual question answering. In CVPR, 2016. 2
[36] A. Shin, Y. Ushiku, and T. Harada. The Color of the Cat is
Gray: 1 Million Full-Sentences Visual Question Answering
(FSVQA). arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.06657, 2016. 2

11

